technology	D3	D2	D1	C3	C2	C1	B3	B2	B1	A3	A2	A1	label	info	barrier
Agronomy practices	1	0	0	1	1	0	0	1	0	0	1	0	1	This abatement option improving agriculture mechanisms, using less intensive cropping system, new seeding methods and managing the rotation of crops. This  could lead to better sustainability of the soil and an estimated emission reduction of 0.2 tCO2e/hectare per year. The estimated abatement potential is: 255 MtCO2e in 2030	The main challenge of changing agronomy practices lies with farmers not being used to new seeds and methods. This may lead to different pay-back times, disturbed regular production and a demanded change in behavior.
Air transport	1	0	0	1	0	1	0	0	1	0	0	1	2	This abatement option focuses on different processes within the air transport sector in three categories: the operations-efficiency improvements, using alternative fuels and improving infrastructure and air-traffic management. The estimated abatement potential is: 256 MtCO2e in 2030	Changing fuel for air transport requires higher production costs and might imply a change in suppliers, hampering the implementation. Furthermore, some physical changes might be necessary in the alternatives fuels infrastructure. For improving operational efficiency, the main challenge lies in renewed cooperation between actors as air traffic control, airports etc. 
Battery Electric Vehicles	2	1	1	0	0	1	1	0	2	1	1	1	3	This abatement option considers full electric vehicles using chemical energy to store electricity in rechargeable battery backs. This option is expected to have a great emission-reduction potential, but market introduction still is relatively slow. A reduction of about 3.2 tCO2e/year could be accomplished compared to using conventional gasoline ICE vehicles. The estimated abatement potential is: 400 MtCO2e in 2030	Main barriers to implementation of the electric vehicles are associated to the costs and uncertainty of the infrastructure, the range of the car and the higher upfront investments that are needed. The most complexity arises from the infrastructural perspective as this is still very minimal. This requires a change in behavior and new collaborations between the different actors. 
Bioethanol lignocellulosic	1	1	1	2	1	1	1	1	1	1	2	1	4	This abatement option considers the second generation biofuel bioethanol lignocellulosic. This is produced from sources such as agricultural residues, forest residues, woody energy crops and feedstock. The CO2 reduction potential can reach up to 90 percent.  The estimated abatement potential is: 248 MtCO2e in 2030	The technology is not yet proven on a large scale, which leads to high uncertainties. It could therefore still make efficiency improvements that could lead to better pay-back times as these are currently very high. Furthermore, coordination amongst actors is required in terms of production, but also when it comes to using new biofuels as not all motors are able to cope with the second generation biofuels
Building efficiency new built	0	1	1	0	0	1	0	1	1	1	1	2	5	This abatement option considers the improvement of energy efficiency levels for newly built housing. The demand of energy consumption can be improved through improved building design related to better insulation,  better use of materials and higher efficiency water heating. Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) is one of the leading programs and can lead to a GHG reduction of 16%. The estimated abatement potential is: 624 MtCO2e in 2030	Investment costs for buildings with higher efficiency are approximately 8% higher than for conventional buildings. This is relatively quickly paid back. On a physical level, changes are fairly minor and the knowledge on technologies is often present. As multiple parties will be involved with the construction of new buildings, possible conflicts might arise and there is mutual dependence. Furthermore, the frequency of opportunity is fairly limited as buildings cannot be built anytime, anyplace. 
Cars full hybrid	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	1	6	This abatement option considers the transition to more vehicles with both an ICE and electric motor onboard.  It is calibrated to run on the electric motor or ICE motor depending on the conditions. Roll-out of full hybrid cars could lead to a reduction 2.7 tCO2e/year compared to using conventional ICE vehicles. The estimated abatement potential is: 359 MtCO2e in 2030	The main barriers to implementation lie in the category of costs and financing. Full hybrid cars are slightly more expensive than conventional cars with an internal combustion engine. Apart from this, a car is only bought once every 5-10 years, limiting the frequency of opportunity. 
Cars plug-in hybrid	1	1	1	0	0	1	1	1	1	0	1	1	7	The introduction and further development of plug-in hybrid vehicles, i.e. full-hybrids that can be recharged both by the vehicle-driving cycle and by external sources, enabling the vehicle to run more frequently on electrical power.  An emission reduction of 2.7 tCO2e/year compared to the gasoline ICE vehicles can be achieved. The estimated abatement potential is: 282 MtCO2e in 2030	Requires an upfront investment, although it is not much higher compared to conventional ICE vehicles. High barriers are present in the need for a charging infrastructure. This has its impact on a multi-actor level as many different parties are involved and dependent on each other. Furthermore, it has an impact on the physical environment. The presence of range anxiety for plug-in vehicles leads to a required change in behavior, although this is less as is the case for Battery Electric Vehicles. 
Clinker substition by fly ash	1	0	0	0	1	1	0	1	2	0	0	0	8	Reducing the clinker content in cement, by substituting clinker with industrial components such as fly ash. This can reduce process and combustion emissions as well as power needed for clinker production. The estimated abatement potential is: 189 MtCO2e in 2030	The main implementation barriers lie in the dependence on other actors that need to supply fly ash to cement producers. Furthermore, new technologies and transport systems hamper easy implementation of this carbon abatement option.
Coal CCS new built	0	2	1	2	0	2	1	2	2	2	2	2	9	This abatement option considers the carbon capture and storage in newly built coal power plants. As the design of new built plans can be made from scratch, it has more potential for efficient capture of carbon emissions. The total emission saving from capture and avoidance amounts to 1.5 -1.8 tCO2/MWh. The estimated abatement potential is: 1620 MtCO2e in 2030	High upfront investments are required with long pay-back times. Furthermore, conflicts might arise for storage of the captured carbon and many actors are involved in both the supply chain as in the debate (environmental agencies). On a physical level, the physical impact on transport and storage is considerate and there is still uncertainty concerning the effectiveness on a high level. A final barrier is the frequency of opportunity for the construction of a new CCS power plant. 
Coal CCS retrofit	2	2	1	2	2	2	1	2	2	2	2	2	10	This abatement option considers the carbon capture in existing coal power plants by capturing the CO2 from the point source of exhaust gases. Storing will consecutively be stored in deep geological formations.  The estimated abatement potential is: 572 MtCO2e in 2030	High upfront investments are required with long pay-back times. Furthermore, conflicts might arise for storage of the captured carbon and many actors are involved in both the supply chain as in the debate (environmental agencies). On a physical level, the physical impact on transport and storage is considerate and there is still uncertainty concerning the effectiveness on a high level. Furthermore, the installation requires at least a year. A final barrier is the frequency of opportunity for the construction of a new CCS power plant. 
Composting new waste	1	0	0	0	1	1	0	1	2	0	1	1	11	Recycling and composting reduce the introduction of new waste to landfills. This avoids methane emissions from new organic waste. Composting, or aerobic digestion is s a biological process with compost as final product that can be used for further applications. The emission reduction of composting new waste is about 1 tCO2e/ton per ton of waste, compared to waste emitted originating from a landfill. The estimated abatement potential is: 221 MtCO2e in 2030	Composting new waste requires investments for new machinery. This is however a fairly small investment. The main barriers to implementation arise from the need of support from municipalities to have a recycling system and a place to sell compost in place. This could possibly lead to conflicts and also require a change in behavior. 
Cropland nutrient management	1	0	1	1	0	0	1	1	1	0	0	0	12	Improved nutrient management reducing GHG emissions, by reducing fertilizer-waste, increasing land efficiency and implementing rotational land practices. An estimated reduction of 0.14tCO2e/hectare per year is estimated. A 5-20% reduction would mean a reduction of 56 -224 MtCO2. The estimated abatement potential is: 132 MtCO2e in 2030	The barriers related to costs and financing are very low. The main barriers are present in the categories of multi-actor complexity and behavior. Improving the nutrient management requires a change in behavior for farmers and also involve a dependence on other actors because new products are needed. Furthermore, it might have an impact on quality of the end-product that could lead to conflicts. 
Electricity from landfill gas	0	1	0	0	0	1	1	1	2	1	1	2	13	This abatement option considers the capturing of landfill gases to generate electricity. The landfill gas is composed mainly out of methane (CH4) and carbon dioxide (CO2). 75% of the landfill can be captured over its lifetime. Direct use of landfill gas is highly net-profit-positive, because of the savings from using it as a fuel for nearby industrial facilities. The estimated abatement potential is: 351 MtCO2e in 2030	The technology is fairly expensive due to the costs of the pipes to recover the gas. Multi-actor complexities might arise as the power plant operator and the owner of the landfill site are often different actors and might not always agree. On a physical level and behavioral level, the implementation barriers are minimal. 
Energy efficiency 1 iron & steel	0	1	0	1	1	0	0	1	0	2	0	2	14	Improving energy efficiency in the iron and steel industry by structural production shifts, improved process flows, innovations on pumping systems, coal moisture control, or heat recovery. Especially, recovering energy from waste heat from the blast furnace could improve the efficiency. Co2? The estimated abatement potential is: 246 MtCO2e in 2030	This carbon abatement option requires a large upfront investment, but can relatively quickly be paid back. Furthermore, improving energy efficiency has its physical impact as processes are complex and need to run 24 hours per day. Also new efficiency technologies are relatively less certain than conventional methods. 
Geothermal	1	1	0	1	1	1	1	2	2	2	2	2	15	This option considers large scale geothermal energy generation. Deep drilling is necessary to generate electricity from geothermal heat. The most widely used technology for generating geothermal energy is the employment of a geothermal fluid passing through a heat exchanger heating another fluid with a low boiling point, which in turn vaporizes and drives a turbine. The emissions of geothermal energy amount to 50 gCO2e/kWh. The estimated abatement potential is: 269	The main barriers originate from the categories of costs and financials and multi-actor complexity. Drilling machinery is very expensive and the power generation is too. On a multi-actor level, barriers mainly originate from social conflicts (earthquakes, soil quality) ad the many hustles with munipiality that often prevent private investments in geothermal projects.
Grassland management	1	0	1	1	0	0	1	1	1	0	0	0	16	Focuses on increased grazing intensity, irrigation of grasslands, fire management and introduction of new species. Central in this approach, les the elimination of any pesticide or fertilizer. The consequence of this approach is that roots go deeper, water-retention increases, plants are more pest-resistant and soil fertility improves. This could lead to an estimated reduction of approximately 0.23 tCO2e/hectare per year.  The estimated abatement potential is: 1343 MtCO2e in 2030	In terms of costs and physical interdependencies there are no significant barriers hampering the implementation of improved grassland management. The main challenges lie in collaboration with multiple farmers that work within the same consortia, or farmers that share the same land. This could potentially lead to unclear responsibilities and conflicts. Furthermore, a change in behavior is required for the farmers. 
High penetration wind	0	1	1	1	1	2	1	2	2	1	2	2	17	This option considers wind energy, with a penetration of the energy mix higher than 10%. This distinction between low and high penetration is made because a high penetration level requires more adaption of the network to account for the variability coming from wind energy.  This means that the costs per MWh move from  €2-3  to  €3-5 per MWh. The estimated abatement potential is: 1043 MtCO2e in 2030	High investment costs are required with fairly high payback times. On a multi-actor level, there are many actors that are dependent on each other for activities as construction, connection to the grid and communication with the local environment. The latter could lead to conflicts between actors. The physical implication on the environment is high and has a high impact on others. It could also disturb regular operations by means of the volatility of the wind energy that needs to be fed into the grid. The impact on a behavioral level is fairly limited. 
Lighting switch to LED (residential)	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	18	This abatement option considers switching incandescent lighting to LED lighting in residential homes. LED lights are estimated to be 40% more efficient than fluorescent lights and even 80% more efficient than common incandescent lights. The estimated abatement potential is: 221 MtCO2e in 2030	For consumers to switch to LED lighting, there are very few significant barriers to implementation. The current investment costs of a LED are approximately €10. Furthermore, not all consumers are yet fully aware of the advantages that LED bring and are still less known than the most popular incandescent light bulbs. 
Nuclear energy	0	2	0	1	0	1	1	2	2	2	2	2	19	Generating power from nuclear energy is a highly debated option. Reasons for this debate comes from costs, safety and waste. This has hampered a larger introduction of nuclear power plants, but there still is a large potential for GHG reduction.  Emissions from nuclear power plants amount to 90-140 gCO2e/kWh. The estimated abatement potential is: 1840 MtCO2e in 2030	Building nuclear power plants is very capital intensive and takes a very long time as well. This also limits the frequency of opportunity to build one. The size of the project requires many involved actors, not only in construction but also in the supply chain for nuclear energy. The bad reputation of nuclear energy can also lead to conflicts with NGOs  and a bad public opinion. 
PV panels homes	1	0	1	0	0	1	0	1	0	1	1	1	20	Installing solar energy on the homes of individual house owners. Producing solar energy has no emissions. Construction of the panels accounts for 20-80 gCO2e/kWh. The estimated abatement potential is: 1216 MtCO2e in 2030	Installing PV panels requires a significant upfront investment that have a pay-back time of about 7 years. Physical implementation might in some cases be hard due to differences in rooftops and position towards the sun. Furthermore, a required change in behavior might be present with the rise of smart grids. 
Reduced deforestation (agriculture)	2	0	1	0	2	2	1	2	2	1	2	1	21	This abatement option considers the decrease of deforestation for agricultural use by compensating landholders from the lost revenue from one-time timber extraction. 70% of deforestation comes from agricultural use and this leads to biodiversity losses, soil erosion and CO2 emissions. The estimated abatement potential is: 1208 MtCO2e in 2030	The costs mainly originate from annual payments to protect areas from being run-over. This investment does however not have a return on investment. Multi-actor complexity arises from the distribution and generation of the finances. Furthermore, preventing an event to happen is harder than implanting new practices. The ultimate goal of this carbon abatement option leads to a high physical embeddedness. On a behavioral level, local people need to find new occupations as their main source of income changes. 
Reduced deforestation (timber harvesting)	2	0	1	0	2	2	1	2	2	1	2	1	22	This abatement option considers reduction of emissions from deforestation due to unsustainable timber extraction through compensation to landholders for lost timber revenue. The estimated abatement potential is: 262 MtCO2e in 2030	The costs mainly originate from annual payments to protect areas from being run-over. This investment does however not have a return on investment. Multi-actor complexity arises from the distribution and generation of the finances. Furthermore, preventing an event to happen is harder than implanting new practices. The ultimate goal of this carbon abatement option leads to a high physical embeddedness.  On a behavioral level, timber companies need to embrace sustainable forestry instead of the 'cut it and leave it' business model. 
Residential appliances	1	1	1	1	1	0	0	1	1	1	1	1	23	This abatement option considers the improvement of efficiency within residential homes by replacing appliances, such as refrigerators, washers, dishwashers and air conditioning with higher efficiency models. This also involves the smart usage of these appliances, by using sensors to analyze the right moment to use energy. The estimated abatement potential is: 255 MtCO2e in 2030	The barriers to implementation for improving efficiency of residential appliances are spread over all four Y-factor categories. There are upfront investments needed that are often slightly more expensive than for conventional appliances. The multi-actor complexity mainly arises when smart networks become more upcoming, as this requires new dynamics in collaboration. On a physical level, smart grids also provide uncertainties. Behavioral changes originate from having to use new equipment in a different way on different times. 
Small hydro	1	1	0	0	1	2	0	1	2	1	2	2	24	This abatement option considers the small scale generation of hydropower of an installed capacity around 25-50 MW. There is high potential for this abatement option as only 25% of the potential has been developed. This small scale hydropower is mainly generated by obtaining energy from river flow. The estimated abatement potential is: 329 MtCO2e in 2030	The main implementation barrier is the necessity for available upfront financials.  The pay-back time approximates 20 years. As the projects are very large, the amount of actors involved is large and their dependence on each other is high. On a physical level, the impact on the physical environment is present. Especially when it comes to introducing dam-projects. 
